In this video, we'll look at
how we can use both inheritance
and composition to reuse
existing code in our projects.
We've already seen what public
inheritance is and how it can help us
create class hierarchies that provide
general and specialized functionality.
Public inheritance creates an
is a relationship between the
derived and based classes.
And with inheritance, we automatically
inherit all of our base classes
attributes and operations.
And we can see examples like
an employee is a person,
a checking account is an
account, a circle is a shape.
However, sometimes we want to reuse
existing classes, but the is a
relationship really doesn't apply.
For example, suppose that
all persons have an account.
I can't really say that a person
is an account or an account is a
person since that doesn't make sense.
Instead, we can use composition
to model this relationship.
Composition creates a has a
relationship between classes.
For example, a person has an
account, a player has a special
attack, a circle has a location.
You get the idea.
Using a combination of inheritance
and composition, we can express
complex relationships between
classes and leverage code reuse.
Let's see an example.
In this example, we have the
person hierarchy we saw earlier.
Note the inheritance relationships are
modeled with the triangle pointing to
the base class of the relationship.
As we mentioned in the last slide, it wouldn't make
sense to introduce another inheritance
relationship between person and account since
the is a relationship just doesn't apply.
So we use composition instead.
Notice the association
between person and account.
It's modeled as a solid line, no
inheritance triangle this time.
Uml provides several different
types of notations to model
associated classes that don't
have an inheritance relationship.
These are aggregation,
association and composition.
You can learn more about these in an
object-oriented design course, but
we'll use the term composition to
simply mean it has a relationship,
and we won't be concerned about
whether the account object can
logically exist without being
associated with a person object.
So what we're describing here
is that a person has an account,
that's exactly what we want.
So does a student
also have an account.
Yes, because a student is a person.
What about a faculty member.
Yes, because a faculty
member is a person.
Notice that we create the
association at the most general
class in the hierarchy where
it applies since it will also
apply to its derived classes.
We've actually been using
composition all along.
When we model class data
members, we're using composition.
Many times the instance variables
are primitive types, so we don't
include them in class diagrams,
but the concept is the same.
So when do you choose
inheritance over composition.
Many times it's easy to decide if the
is a relationship doesn't make sense,
then don't use public inheritance.
Other times it's not so clear.
A rule of thumb when using
inheritance is to step back look
at your design and be sure that
the inheritance is appropriate.
If you can model a relationship with
composition, then you should consider
doing that first since inheritance
adds more complexity to your design.
In this case, an inheritance
relationship between student
and account simply doesn't make
sense, so we use composition.
Here's how the class person might
be declared using composition.
Notice that it's pretty
much what we've been doing
so far in this course.
Composition is a common design pattern
for reuse and you'll see it used much
more frequently than inheritance.
But we can use both inheritance
and composition together to
create powerful frameworks that
allow us to reuse existing code.
Okay,o in the next video,
we'll see what the syntax of
inheritance looks like in c++.